---
title: 50 Reviews for UFO 50
tags: [ufo 50]
class: page-ufo
---

<img src="/assets/160/01-barbuta.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Barbuta_:** An
appropriate introduction to the collection in more ways than one. Much hay has
been made in my earshot of the "[kaizo]-like" trap in room one, and *to a
degree* that's emblematic of the logic of *UFO 50*—it does ask you to take your
lumps and learn what it's teaching you without focusing overmuch on a concept of
"fairness"—I think it's not the heart of what either the game or the collection
is about.

A stronger indication of what's to come is found in the game's pacing, the slow
walk speed and deliberately long load times between screens, the way the game is
structured like a search action game but doesn't have internal saves, asking you
to replay it from scratch each time and thereby map out your preferred route
rather than just passively accumulating everything in one run. Stronger still is
the sense of mystery: even with a cherry in hand, there are rooms I haven't
found and mechanics I haven't used. *Barbuta* challenges the player to dig
deeper if they so choose, and in doing so presages the deepest puzzles the
collection as a whole has to offer.

[kaizo]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaizo

<img src="/assets/160/02-bug-hunter.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Bug Hunter_:** My
arc with this game presaged my own personal experience with a lot of _UFO 50_.
When I first picked it up, I got so overwhelmed that I put it right back down
and wasn't sure if I was ever going to go back. Every decision has so many
cascading outcomes that it was hard not to feel like I wasn't drowning in
opportunity costs. But {% mention 'Cera' %} loves it and coached me through the
basics enough that I began to get the hang of it.

One of my favorite things about _UFO 50_, the thing that made it a slam dunk for
my [game of the year], is the way it gets people swapping hints like they're all
hanging around a cabinet in an arcade. Almost every single one of these games
had *someone* I knew championing it, someone who was also willing to sit down
and help me not only beat it but understand what they saw in it. The true joy of
the collection is the community it inspires.

[game of the year]: /2024-oaties

<img src="/assets/160/03-ninpek.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Ninpek_:** I started
out so bad at _Ninpek_, but what really got my goat was that as I kept
attempting it I could feel myself getting better. It's not fair of it to be so
fair! And the better I got, the more fun I would have just jamming it over and
over again, and the more I jammed it the better I got... I went from “no way am
I golding this” to getting a cherry within a couple weeks, and it felt so good.

I never actually played a run-and-gun enough to become *good* at it before
_Ninpek_. Once again, an early illustration of the theme of the collection: the
presentation itself encourages the exploration of new genres that in another
context I'd avoid. Their existence in the collection vouches for the quality of
the games, and in providing a structure to play them with friends and clear
victory and challenge conditions, pushes me to explore them thoroughly and makes
even the experience of failure (an absolutely inevitable part of playing these
games).

<img src="/assets/160/04-paint-chase.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Paint Chase_:** I
started out as bad at this as I was at _Ninpek_, but I couldn't muster the
desire to go back to it enough to get cherry. Even the gold was among the last
things I did in the whole game, despite playing through the games
chronologically at first. Simultaneously too fast- and slow-paced, trying to
juggle all the things I had to pay attention to at once never stopped feeling a
bit like pulling teeth.

<img src="/assets/160/05-magic-garden.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Magic Garden_:**
An early favorite. Until I got my first cherry, every time I'd boot up _UFO 50_
this would be the first game I'd play just for the joy of it. I loved working
out a strategy first to maximize drops for gold and then, with that achieved, to
score well enough to hit cherry without building too much of a backlog and
dying. The two characters are very obviously in love and I will fight you if you
try to tell me otherwise.

It's interesting to me that, in a collection with plenty of "arcadey" games,
this is one of the *most* aracdey: the play is all constrained to one screen
with no change in setting or mechanics, and scoring all about optimizing the
play of a *very* simple system. I'm a little surprised they didn't go back to
this well more often, especially considering how much of a delight this dip into
it is.

<img src="/assets/160/06-mortol.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Mortol_:** The first
game whose design made me say "holy shit" right out loud. Although nearly every
game in _UFO 50_ is meticulously designed to great effect, _Mortol_ stands above
almost all of them in being a work of real genius. It feels both totally outside
real-world design currents even today and entirely plausible for the 80s
(although '84 does seem a bit early for something this complex). The ability to
replay levels and add to your total guys is incredibly engaging, and building up
a sufficient buffer of sacrificial men to attempt the final level in cherry runs
was a deeply satisfying culmination of the meticulous optimization the rest of
the game encourages.

<img src="/assets/160/07-velgress.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Velgress_:** Another
early game that started out feeling fiendishly difficult and ended up being a
total joy. This very much feels like it expects to be played like a mobile game
from the golden age, slowly pushing your best height higher in short-term play
sessions in between other activities—a pattern the shared _UFO 50_ launcher
encourages and rewards. Dying at the very beginning of a new level is undeniably
demoralizing, but runs are quick enough that it's hard to take too much
umbridge. It's hard to believe that the designer of *Downwell* contributed a
game and it _wasn't_ this one.

The manual scroll in _Velgress_ is a very clever companion to the dissolving
tiles. You can't have it be a standard autoscroller because it would suck *so*
much to get stuck at the top of the screen with your platform disintegrating,
and at the same time it does give you a bit of grace if you're at the bottom of
the screen with tiles to spare to actually take a breath and think through your
routing.

<img src="/assets/160/08-zoldath.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Planet Zoldath_:**
The heart of a randomizer pulled into a game in and of itself. If you'd shown
this to a naïve Natalie and told her it was part of the genesis of procedural
world design she would have believed you. Lacks a bit of depth in the long ends
of the play, but it's fun to run a few times and not so tough that it overstays
its welcome. The real treasure here is how it fits into the overarching world
that begins to develop among the various sci-fi games produced by UFOSoft.

<img src="/assets/160/09-attactics.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Attactics_:** A
tremendously stressful video game that, for a long time, I only ever booted up
with fear and trepidation. It demands so much situational awareness and such
digital swiftness (fingers, not bytes) that I struggled mightily to understand
what to do. Another one where more skilled friends taught me its ways, although
not one I ended up loving so much as quietly accepting as reasonably fun if
sometimes still frustrating.

My biggest complaint, after all the dust has settled and I'm no longer
struggling with the basic strategy, is the way swapping works. It's intensely
annoying that you can't move a unit up without affecting all your intermediate
ranks, but the worst of it is the fact that you can swap a unit backwards but
not forwards, despite those being equivalent maneuvers. The controls are already
hard enough, there's no need to make it harder arbitrarily!

<img src="/assets/160/10-devilition.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Devilition_:** A
very charming premise. Either a skosh too easy or just very in tune with my
strategic mind, because I only ever played two games of it: one that ended with
a trophy, and a second that ended with a cherry. All the same, an extremely
satisfying way to represent a domino effect that I would love to see expanded
upon in something a bit more complex and toothsome (and maybe with less of a
time pressure element).

<img src="/assets/160/11-kick-club.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Kick Club_:**
Pretty middle-of-the-road as far as the difficult arcade-y games go, this is one
where even my friends who championed it couldn't make me fall in love. It
doesn't have the gratifying replayability of _Velgress_ and the score farming
isn't as deeply compelling as _Ninpek_, but neither do the initial levels feel
as much like a repetitive slog as _Paint Chase_.

The level design here really runs the gamut, too. Some of them are really fun to
route—I like the baseballs in the final world a lot especially—while some are
intensely aggravating, feeling like you're supposed to just memorize a movement
pattern by rote rather than reacting to the level.

<img src="/assets/160/12-avianos.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Avianos_:** This is a
sick one for sure. I ended up starting it while video chatting with a bunch of
strategy gamers and we had a *lot* of fun learning the ropes from nearly no
information and eventually powering our way through all five trials. The only
reason I didn't instantly cherry this was because I wanted to save some for
later, and even then I was only able to hold out for a few days.

The board game history of the UFOSoft founders gives a very cool in-universe
context to this. It's very much euro game in flavor, feeling a lot like an early
port of an existing board game to a digital context. Specifically, it feels like
a game made by board game designers who are specifically excited about the
potential of the computer to do things like "automated combat" and "hidden board
states" that just aren't possible face to face.

<img src="/assets/160/13-mooncat.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Mooncat_:** I adore
the way the controls page completely buries the lead for how bizarre this game
is, but even more than that I adore how good this feels once the controls click
in your brain. It's insane to describe this as "the sequel to _Barbuta_" (I
genuinely wonder if Thorson Petter's characterization comes from "what sort of
person would be assigned _Barbuta 2_ and make this"), but it does have the same
sense of mystery with lots of corners to explore and secrets to discover. And
the mood throughout is truly immaculately strange.

<img src="/assets/160/14-bushido-ball.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Bushido Ball_:**
I go back and forth on this one. Sometimes it feels like a compelling game of
lightning-fast strategy, other times it feels basically random. Even after
achieving gold I couldn't entirely tell if I'm missing mechanics to make the
super and curve shots do something more useful than fly straight at my opponent,
and I'm not ashamed to admit that I got my cherry in the cheesiest way I could
find.

This is also the first of several PVP games in the collection, all of which left
me really curious how they'd actually feel in a mildly-competitive setting. I'm
not interested (or frankly good) enough to find out myself, but if anyone's
tried this or any of the others, drop a note in the comments because I'm eager
to hear.

<img src="/assets/160/15-block-koala.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Block Koala_:**
Go soak a bone! The early game of this has been a bit controversial among my
friends for how little tutorializing it does, but I generally enjoy puzzles
where part of the puzzle is figuring out what to even do. I think the level
design here is generally solid, although some levels lean a little too hard on
gotcha moments where you realize you have to unwind your entire solution for my
taste.

There is a common pattern across this collection of games asking for the
player's patience. Often this is patience with failure, patience with dying,
patience with learning what the game is trying to teach you. In *Block Koala*,
the patience is just being willing to move your guy around the level at an
ambling pace. It's the sort of game that's much more palatable if you consider
it to be a bit meditative, or else if you have someone around to chat with while
you play.

<img src="/assets/160/16-camouflage.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Camouflage_:**
Juxtaposing this game's ten breezy levels with _Block Koala_'s fifty in the
default chronological order is quite surprising. I don't mind the short
(breezy!) length in and of itself, but I think I would have moved it elsewhere
in the order just to make it feel less strange how tiny this is by comparison. I
do enjoy the puzzles, though—”stealth puzzle” is quite a neat genre, and it
exercises very different parts of the brain than the other puzzle games.

<img src="/assets/160/17-campanella.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Campanella_:**
They somehow managed to encapsulate the feeling of putting on eyeliner in video
game form. This is *so fucking hard*, especially past the first world where the
difficulty of the levels starts to pace and then outpace the number of lives you
can readily farm from them. This was the first game where I really didn't know
whether I *could* get the gold, even if I put in the time. But I did keep
putting in the time, and like *Ninpek* I somehow did get better on average run
over run. By the time I got the cherry, I'd become quite fond of the way it felt
to fly my little bell and traverse these wacky and colorful spaces, and I could
understand why this was such a hit in-universe.

*Campanella* is also a great example of how the hardest games often have the
easiest cherries. Naturally the cherry condition is always strictly harder than
the victory itself, but in *Campanella* and a number of other particularly tough
games once you can achieve gold the cherry seems like it's already within your
grasp. You've probably already found a bunch of hidden coffees on the way to
your trophy—after all, each one is fully half an extra life, and you'll need
those lives if you're struggling—so how much more work could it really be to
route in the rest of them? This is such a smart choice, and this sort of
thoughtful challenge design is a big part of why I ended up with so many
cherries to my name.

<img src="/assets/160/18-golfaria.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Golfaria_:** While I
think *Gold Story* is a slightly better execution on the concept of a "golf RPG"
than this, it's a concept that can comfortably include multiple entries. Some of
my friends found the early game frustrating, but I liked the challenge of
getting more freedom to roam as I found shot extensions and routed in birdies
and eagles (a lesson I've learned from playing these games is that I find
routing particularly fun). Even once I had a comfortable number of shots,
exploring the overworld and earning more power-ups was a lot of fun.

My big complaint here is that the path to cherry felt sloggy. I never
particularly like the experience of combing an overworld I've already mostly
explored for nooks and crannies I happened to have missed, and where other games
with 100% cherry conditions give direction as to where to look you're absolutely
on your own in *Golfaria*.

<img src="/assets/160/19-the-great-bell-race.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_The Great
Bell Race_:** I absolutely cannot hold myself back from calling this _Kampanella
Kart_, and I won't apologize for it. I loved this game the instant I started
playing it, even while I was feeling pretty ambivalent towards _Campanella_
itself. The movement feels much freer when you can take a hit or two, and
there's so much edge to be gained through both skillful movement and clever
planning in the races against AIs that you can breeze through it quickly and
have a good time doing it.

<img src="/assets/160/20-warp-tank.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Warptank_:** My
favorite of the outright puzzle games. Lots of lateral thinking involved in the
trickier bits of figuring out how to navigate, let alone how to grab the secret
treats. The parts of this that are more action-oriented aren't as interesting to
me, but neither are they terribly intrusive so I'm not complaining.

The borrowing of the flower motif from *Mooncat* is extremely clever, very
neatly solving the problem that *Golfaria* suffers from when trying to go for a
cherry without coming anywhere close to giving away the whole game. I find
myself wishing they'd used it even more in later games, but perhaps there's a
lore reason why that couldn't be.

<img src="/assets/160/21-waldorf.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Waldorf's Journey_:**
Kind of a successor to *Mooncat* in the sense that it's another game (and
certainly not the last!) built around the idea of coming to grips with a strange
movement scheme. My first completion was by the skin of my teeth, and left me
feeling if anything even more confused about the best way to approach motion
across the floating ice platforms that make up this game's terrain. My second
(again with {% mention 'Cera' %}'s help) ended with a cherry and a comfortable
margin of extra shells and fish in my belly. This still isn't my favorite, but
it is fundamentally a lot of fun to learn new strategies and then put them in
action to great effect.

<img src="/assets/160/22-porgy.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Porgy_:** A search
action game that's oddly by-the-books for the standards of this collection. The
economizing of which upgrades you bring when does encourage an interesting kind
of risk/reward calculation, although the patience required to spend the time on
an exploratory journey before going back for the upgrades you now know you'll
need can be frustrating.

I do appreciate the way the world holds onto certain aspects of its state until
you die, allowing you to open pathways semi-permanently and encouraging you to
explore with caution rather than making sacrificial runs just to get
information. But I wish this were a bit more telegraphed... I spent a lot of
time just resetting to save time getting back to base and unknowingly losing
progress as a result.

<img src="/assets/160/23-onion-delivery.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Onion
Delivery_:** This is the game for which I had the biggest swing in opinion
between starting and finishing it. Plenty of games in the collection started out
hard, but when I started playing *Onion Delivery* it felt like licking
sandpaper. The controls are, of course, intentionally obtuse. Even given that, I
had trouble executing actions like strafing that seemed both simple and critical
with the remotest consistency.

But I kept playing, and {% mention 'Eden' %} kept guiding and encouraging me,
and little by little I started getting an intuition for how to move my little
car and a sense of how the big city was laid out. I could pretty consistently
make it from delivery to delivery with relatively few deaths, and eventually I
managed to last a whole week.

My cherry run was where I really fell in love with the game. After pointedly
never looking at a map all the way to gold, once I decided to go for cherry I
brought up a conjoined map to which Eden had added a bunch of useful additional
information. After each delivery, I'd plot my exact route to the next stop,
nabbing as many time extensions as possible along the way. This was a blast, and
I quickly had the cherry as well as a lingering desire to play even more.

<img src="/assets/160/24-caramel-caramel.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Caramel
Caramel_:** I got to this game at just about the same time I cherried _Ninpek_,
and it definitely feels like a suitable upgrade. It's hard as hell but still fun
enough to lose hours just jamming it over and over trying to eke out a bit more
progress than I made before. I'm not much of a shooting gamer, but as I
mentioned I do love routing, and the points routing for this game is incredibly
deep.

I think this is probably the game with the biggest ratio of "time to cherry"
versus "length of run" for me in the entire collection. I wasn't sure I was even
going to be able to get a _gold_ until I was already on the final row of games,
and I'm still a little bit flabbergasted that I managed a cherry. But when I got
hit, it sure did feel good.

<img src="/assets/160/25-party-house.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Party House_:**
Absolute natbait. I love a deckbuilder, and the particular kinds of resource
management this asks for are both deeply compelling and totally different from
anything I've played elsewhere. The scripted scenarios are fun, but they feel
mostly like training for the real meat of the game: the random mode. There are
games that allow for total combo horseshit, games that require extremely precise
fundamentals, and everything in between.

My only real complaint about this game, if I have to articulate one, is that it
feels much more out of its time than the rest of the collection. To be sure,
there are plenty gentle design anachronisms, but this whole game is wholly
embodying a premise that wouldn't exist for another couple decades. But even so,
I'd rather be able to play it than not!

<img src="/assets/160/26-hot-foot.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Hot Foot_:** I found
this much more comprehensible as a versus action game than _Bushido Ball_. It’s
still quite difficult, but as I played I grew to understand and appreciate the
strategic depths—which players to pick, how to use the various supers, how to
score multiple hits and avoid getting multihit myself. The co-op mode is a
particular treat, and a fun way to grind for cherry, although I'll admit again
that in the end I grabbed it on my own by somewhat exploiting the enemy AI.

This is, however, the first game that *really* starts to show the shortcomings
of the "two buttons and a d-pad" restriction imposed by the fictional LX-system
consoles. While the game hums when it's doing what you want it to, far too much
of the skill is tied up in trying not to switch teammates when you want to pick
up an item or passing the beanbag when you want to slide it at an opponent. I
bet a version of this with two more buttons would be noticeably more fun, and I
say that as someone who generally likes silly and technical input schemes.

<img src="/assets/160/27-divers.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Divers_:** What some
consider slow about this game I find pleasantly contemplative. It is undeniably
a bare-bones version of the RPG concept, and the lack of any sort of UFOSoft
twist on the formula is a little puzzling, but nevertheless I enjoyed the time I
spent exploring these watery caverns and I found more than a little mystery to
intrigue me in their depths. I will say that I had no problem grabbing a cherry
without ever learning what the point of hammers or shields is, though, which may
speak to a flaw in the design.

<img src="/assets/160/28-rail-heist.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Rail Heist_:** An
absolute banger that I picked up and did not put down until I'd reached sixty
stars—something very unusual for how I played *UFO 50*, where most of my play
sessions involved bouncing around between all the games I had started but not
yet cherried. An incredible execution on the concept of an 8-bit _Hitman_, and
it scratched all the same itches. In some ways the formula is even better—by
keeping the runs short and forbidding mid-level saves, the player is motivated
to actually engage with the think-on-your-feet mechanics and learn to salvage
imperfect runs while still planning and playing towards specific goals. This
tops my list of games in *UFO 50* that I want to see elaborated on more, if not
by these devs then by someone taking inspiration from them.

<img src="/assets/160/29-vainger.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Vainger_:** _Metroid_
meets _VVVVVV_, or as {% mention 'Zandra' %} pointed out, more accurately
_Metroid_ meets _Metal Storm_. While this definitely has some of the draggy
feeling of the orthodox search action formula, where traversal can get to be a
slog and finding the last few upgrades feels like looking for your lost keys,
mixing and matching your build is very cool and the level design providing
different challenges depending on exactly how you’ve set yourself up is
extremely clever.

<img src="/assets/160/30-rock-on-island.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Rock On!
Island_:** Would you believe I'd never played a tower defense game before
playing this? I wasn't sure how much I'd like it, but it ended up sucking me
right in and getting me hooked. I love going wild with econ in strategy games,
so parsing out exactly how to spend the smallest amount of meat on actually
surviving the first few rounds and the largest on starting to snowball was a
delight, even if it did involve restarting over and over again.

This game is not without serious flaws, though. The fact that most of the
late-game maps cover multiple tiles makes sense from a need to ramp up the
complexity, but it also fights with the core conceit of the genre—in order to
improve your build, you need to understand why it failed. It's especially
painful when your avatar's actions can be critical for either defense or econ,
so you just *can't* hang out and watch the other screen. Many of the hours I
spent on this ended up being lost to rebuilding to the third wave exactly as I
had before, just to try a slightly different arrangement of units to see if they
would fix an issue that happened off-screen.

Similarly frustrating is the inclusion of four unique units in _wave twenty_ of
the massive final map. While the flavor purpose is understandable, this map took
me at least a couple hours in its own right to complete the first time, and
needing to redo it after once of those units was more resilient than I could
possibly have known to plan for was deeply demoralizing.

<img src="/assets/160/31-pingolf.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Pingolf_:** "Pinball
golf" is a beautiful concept beautifully executed. This is so intensely visually
appealing, both in the level design itself and in the pinball-inspired UI around
it, and it lives up to that promise in its play. You can let your ball ricochet
all over the place and eventually make some progress, but as you learn the
levels you learn to set up shots and time your dunks to shave more and more
points off your score. This is a game I could easily play five more level packs
of and enjoy every minute of each of them.

<img src="/assets/160/32-mortol-2.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Mortol II_:** A game
that manages to totally preserve the heart of *Mortol* while creating from its
form something totally new and different. If *Rail Heist* encapsulates the play
of *Hitman*, this encapsulates its level design: a massive world packed chock
full of secrets and interconnections that you gradually begin to understand as
you peel away the layers and move further and further inside. Its real genius is
the way it asks the player to plan their route. 99 guys isn't enough to win if
you're exploring everything in every direction, so a victorious run _must_ plan
a route, and a cherry run must plan one that's fairly slim.

The biggest disappointment here is the size. The world is bit smaller than it
feels like it wants to be; once you see the whole thing it feels a bit like it
under-delivers on the initial promise of scope. Despite knowing that these games
generally hewed small, I did kind of expect this to have a second stage or
something like that. But instead I'll have to hope that some other dev takes up
the inspiration and creates something that could be described as *Mortol III*.

<img src="/assets/160/33-fist-hell.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Fist Hell_:** This
is my least favorite game in the collection that I don't believe to be actively
bad game design. While *UFO 50* has taught me the joys of many genres I hadn't
been into before, brawlers still just don't click with how I think. It's hard
for me to understand why I do well when I do well and what I'm supposed to be
doing when I do poorly. Coupled with the late-game level design which really
seems to fall into "just throw the whole pantry at the player" I found myself
constantly overwhelmed and unhappy. The only reason I even got the trophy was
because I knew if I quit out I'd lose all the progress I already had.

<img src="/assets/160/34-overbold.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Overbold_:** A
twin-stick shooter without the second stick! It took me a long time to wrap my
head around the controls well enough to rapidly adjust my aim without walking
too far in the wrong direction and slamming into an enemy or a bullet. Most of
my equity came from slamming bomb-related upgrades which didn't need to be aimed
and took a bunch of pressure off my movement, so it could be argued that I never
really got the hang of the controls at all. While the actual combat sections
here never stopped being kind of stressful, I did come to enjoy the strategy
around when to buy which upgrade—once again evincing my love for routing.

<img src="/assets/160/35-campanella-2.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Campanella 2_:**
I find this game deeply upsetting, and not just because they followed up my
beloved _Campanella_ with something so miserable. Even more than its
predecessor, *Campanella 2* demands constant precision and high-level execution.
Although you can survive more than one hit, the stream of extra lives—so
generous in retrospect!—has dried up, and the net result is that you have far
less latitude for mistakes in a game with substantially longer runs.

But that's not *intrinsically* a problem. There are plenty of difficult,
demanding games in this collection that I came to love. The real issue is that
on top of demanding precision, *Campanella 2* will also regularly make you lose
runs (sometimes twenty minutes deeper or more) for reason largely or entirely
outside your own control. The resource economy and cherry condition requires you
to explore the map, but the strict fuel limit means that going the wrong way can
kill you stone dead. So you are put in a position where you must decide whether
to go down a certain path, and some of the time doing so will end your run and
some of the time not doing so will end your run, and you have no way to know
which it is.

The real dagger here is that it doesn't have to be this way. The game is
salvageable. The core conceit of flying around with campanella physics and
getting out to explore the world is _so good_, the exploration is really fun at
first, the upgrades and level designs are compelling... this has everything it
needs to be a great successor to a great game. Just tweak the balance, provide
more ways to refuel, and you've got something delightful instead of a miserable
game that I only cherried because I had a run that happened to get lucky.

<img src="/assets/160/36-hyper-contender.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Hyper
Contender_:** Definitely the weirdest of the versus games, but kind of charming
for its strangeness. The conceit here is that all of the characters have a
unique attack _and movement_ mechanic, with only one character having what you
might describe as a "normal jump". That character, unsurprisingly, is generally
considered by far the best because she can actually go where you want her to and
she even shoots in a straight line to boot. Which is too bad! I wish they had
*all* been weirdos you really had to learn to play with.

But that's why the cherry condition is so smart. All three versus games have
different cherry requirements: *Bushido Ball* requires winning without
continues, *Hot Foot* requires winning by large margins, but *Hyper Contender*
is the coolest of all and requires winning with multiple characters. That means
you have to learn to use at least a couple weirdos and engage with the heart of
this game.

<img src="/assets/160/37-valbrace.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Valbrace_:** A
pleasantly compelling synthesis of the ideas of an action RPG and a classic
dungeon crawler steeped in mystery and unexplained mechanics. The fact that you
can miss a major (but not necessary!) movement mechanic early on is laudable,
and really serves to re-emphasize how much of the collection as a whole is built
around the concept of word-of-mouth (or more likely -keyboard) communication as
a key factor in making progress.

I spent a tremendous amount of time while playing this cobbling together maps
for each level, of which I'm quite proud even if they weren't tremendously
necessary when going for cherry. There's just something deeply satisfying about
taking a space that feels mysterious and rendering it not just legible but
shareable. It's part of why I enjoy making wiki contributions as well.

<img src="/assets/160/38-rakshasa.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Rakshasa_:** Another
game that scratched that routing itch real good. The addition of what I called
"little guys", the green dudes who fly around next to you, is the core of what
elevates this above being just a nice *Ghosts 'n Goblins*-alike. They help show
you secrets, but you don't need them to get the secrets, so they serve as a
means of mapping out the space for you. As long as you can keep your little guy
alive (by not getting hit yourself), you'll learn how to grab everything in the
level even if they're not around to help you next time. And of course doing so
is also practice in its own right, so eventually you've almost always got a
little friend tagging along protecting you from danger. What a charmer!

<img src="/assets/160/39-star-waspir.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Star Waspir_:**
The only game in which I never even got gold! And not because I didn't like it,
I'm just quite mediocre at shooting games. I bet if I put as much time into this
as I did *Caramel Caramel* I could get at least a trophy, but since it shows up
pretty late in chronological order I just didn't have as much time to keep going
back, iterating, and getting a little bit better. In the end, I only ever
managed to see Wave 3.1, but I still had fun learning to get that far. It's the
best I've ever gotten at any game like this, so I'm proud of myself!

<img src="/assets/160/40-grimstone.png" class="ufo-disk"> **_Grimstone_:** While
mechanically this is "just" an RPG (albeit one with a clever little timing
minigame for the attack system), it's a totally competent one and it's
absolutely packed full of charm. The setting alone ("what if Texas was pulled
into hell") is really cool, and has the {% mention 'Eden' %} "I grew up in
Texas" stamp of authenticity. And there's so much care put into the
worldbuilding and the dialog writing. Every one of the eight possible members of
your posse has their own vignette you can find somewhere in the world as well as
their own specific mechanics, so different party compositions feel totally
different. You don't know what you're getting when you first choose them, so a
lot of the game is learning what they can do and how to best get them to work
together, just as though you were building a real team.


<div style="clear: left"></div>
