---
tag: [nat reviews, "⟵ kinda"]
---

A lot of my friends don't like star ratings for media, and I get it. It's
inherently reductive, boiling down your complex and contextual mental-emotional
response to a single linear scale that's often taken to approximate some
absolute notion of "quality" that probably doesn't even exist in the first
place. That's why I always make sure to write down actual textual thoughts about
everything I review—to have a place to capture the nuance and context that's
never going to be visible in a star rating.

At the same time, I always enjoy the intellectual exercise of comparing very
different things across the same lines. Back in the day I did yearly "Natto
Awards" among all the media I'd journaled that year, and I'd always have a lot
of fun doing cross-media categories like "best horror" where movies, video
games, and novels were all in competition with one another. It's not
particularly _fair_ as a way of determining quality, but that hardly matters
when quality is fake anyway. What it does do is get you thinking about what it
means to successfully inhabit a genre across media, and what each medium brings
to its takes on the same ideas. I find star ratings do something similar,
pushing me to really think about how much I appreciate a film or video game and
to try to articulate why.

By far the biggest reason I use them all the time, though, is just that my
memory for these things is awful. My subconscious is particularly liable to just
toss out memories it deems "irrelevant" by its own mysterious criteria, and it
turns out that what I thought of a given film—or even whether I saw it at all—is
roundly considered irrelevant. But not to my conscious mind! I actually care a
lot about being able to remember how much I enjoyed something long after the
fact, and star ratings are a major way I do that.

To that end, I also try to keep a pretty consistent rubric of what each rating
means, so I don't shift too much over time. I do inevitably move somewhat and
have to self-correct, of course. This post was itself inspired by me realizing
that I've been giving out {% render 'star-rating-html', rating: 3.5 %} and to a
lesser extent {% render 'star-rating-html', rating: 4 %} ratings too eagerly.
So, as much as a reminder to myself as anything, here's my schema. It's
presented as whole-star tiers only; I'll add a half-star if it's particularly
enjoyable or well-made relative to its tier.

* {% render 'star-rating-html', rating: 1 %}: Corresponds to the "#bad" tag on
  my old media journal. Actively poorly-made, offensive, and/or otherwise
  miserable, either with minimal redeeming qualities or simply irredeemably
  noxious.

* {% render 'star-rating-html', rating: 2 %}: Corresponds to the "#eh" tag on my
  old media journal. Did not vibe with me. Nothing is egregiously wrong, but
  nothing is outstandingly right either. Alternatively, there are things I liked
  about it but somewhat more things I disliked.

* {% render 'star-rating-html', rating: 3 %}: Corresponds to the "#good" tag on
  my old media journal. Solidly enjoyable. Not a barn-burner, but definitely a
  good way to enjoy some art. I'd expect most media to land here, since I
  usually don't even hear about stuff that's worse than this.

* {% render 'star-rating-html', rating: 4: %}: Corresponds to the "#highly
  recommended" tag on my old media journal. _Particularly_ good to excellent,
  the sorts of thing I would actively encourage people to seek out. This tier
  has the most variation—it can be anywhere from "I'd recommend this to people
  who vibe with the specific thing it's doing" to "everyone should probably
  experience this at least once".

* {% render 'star-rating-html', rating: 5: %}: Also corresponds to the "#highly
  recommended" tag on my old media journal, but only the cream of the crop. This
  is a piece of media that connected with me on a deep level, or something
  that's manifestly firing on all cylinders and perfectly accomplishing what it
  set out to do. I don't give out a lot of these.

I think generally when I follow this rubric I tend to rate stuff a little lower
than most people who are just vibing their stars, since {% render
'star-rating-html', rating: 3 %} to me is solidly enjoyable and I think in
general it's considered a bit of a pan. That's probably part of why I tend to
swing away from it over time... but it's also a helpful reminder to take a step
back and think about why I'm giving out the ratings that I am!
