---
title: Happy Hour Manhattan
tags: [nat mixes, alcohol, covid]
---

{% image '/assets/105/happy-hour-manhattan.webp', style: 'max-width: 700px' %}
===
1oz pretty good well whisky (Evan Williams 100 Proof), 1oz pretty bad well
whisky (Four Roses Yellow Label), 1oz totally decent vermouth (Dolin), 3ds
Angostura bitters, one brandied cherry
{% endimage %}

I take pride in my cocktail mixing. I've put in a lot of work into honing my
judgment of flavor combinations, learning how to construct an effective cocktail
recipe, and building a stable of excellent ingredients. Whenever anyone comes to
visit my house, I do my best to give them a beverage experience that's perfectly
tailored to their desires, whether it's sweet or bitter, punchy or mild,
alcoholic or not. Although sometimes experimentalism takes me in a direction
that is not worth repeating, by and large I believe the drinks I make are
excellent.

But excellent is not always what's called for.

{% mention 'Liz' %} and I used to love going out to bars. Our signature move was
to take off work early of an afternoon, show up just as the doors opened around
4pm or so, and just shoot the breeze with the bartender during the easiest hours
of their shift. Bartenders are great conversation because they're always up to
something else in their lives, and the best ones *also* care a lot about the
craft of serving people just what they want. We'd stick around for a few hours,
get some snacks, maybe order dinner if the bar served it or head out for pizza,
and end up home by 8pm feeling like we'd had a full night out.

All that ended, of course, in 2020. Other than a few mostly-outdoor visits
during the vaccine honeymoon[^1], we haven't been back to a bar since, and every
day I miss that experience of lazily sipping on the latest Negroni variant while
merrily chatting with someone who an hour ago was a total stranger to me.

For Liz, that experience was wrapped up inseparably with the particular flavors
of happy hour, during which bars served cheaper drinks off a special menu to
draw customers. Happy hour drinks are usually well-known classics such as a
Manhattan, and they're usually substantially less fancy than a cocktail bar's
primary menu. They'll often use only "well" ingredients, the inexpensive stuff
that the bar buys in bulk to form the backbone of cocktails that are then made
more flavorful with higher-shelf ingredients.

So when that's where Liz's mood takes her, I put away my high-end vermouth and
adulterate my usual mixing whisky. Sometimes an excellent _experience_ calls for
mediocre flavor, and I try never to let my pride get in the way of mixing the
right drink for the moment.

[^1]: Our cheeky term for summer/fall 2021, in the all-to-brief gap between
  getting vaccinated and vaccine-resistant COVID variants taking over the world,
  when people at large were still taking common-sense precautions despite COVID
  numbers being lower than they've ever been since. In some sense I miss those
  days even more than I miss the era before the pandemic, because in those days
  I really believed that people writ large would act to value the lives of those
  around them.
