---
title: non-alcoholic spirits kinda piss me off 
tags: [alcohol]
---

{% image '/assets/121/spirited-away.webp', alt: 'Shelves in a non-alcoholic bottle shop', style: 'width: 600px' %}{% endimage %}

First, let me lay my cards on the table: I like alcoholic beverages. I'm not
much of a drinker as such—it only takes a drink or two to get me feeling Done
for the night and I very rarely even hit that limit—but I really enjoy the depth
and breadth of flavor offered by both spirits and cocktails. They're
particularly good at expressing flavor outside the savory/sugary spectrum that
most other comestibles occupy. Spirits and cocktails are a particular interest
of mine, and that definitely shapes my feelings on this subject to some degree.

But that's not the heart of my complaint. As someone who makes a lot of
cocktails, I consider it part of my basic hospitality to have non-alcoholic
options available for people who want them for any reason. And I don't just mean
the basics like a can of soda—I keep a thorough repertoire of non-alcoholic
mixed drinks on hand specifically so I can make *everyone* something that feels
fancy and tailored to their palate.

It's from this angle that I mostly approach the category of "non-alcoholic
spirits", and through this lens that I find it lacking. Part of it is that most
of the ones I've tasted—admittedly not a *terribly* broad swath—just aren't very
good. They lack textural body and their flavors are often just a bunch of
separate notes that don't come together into a unified whole. But the heart of
what bothers me is that _they're aping alcoholic spirits_, and there's no reason
to do that.

In fairness, "no reason" may be overstating my case a bit. I'm sure there are
compelling marketing reasons to describe something as "non-alcoholic gin" or
"zero proof whiskey", but I don't think it does the product itself any favors.
It simultaneously oversells and undersells the so-called spirit by standing it
up for an impossible comparison while also failing to say anything about what it
actually *is*. Is it water, oil, or vinegar based? Is it an infusion, a
decoction, or a percolation? What flavor profile is it bringing to the table?
All of these are critical questions when actually planning to _drink_ a spirit
or mix it in a cocktail, but they're all overshadowed by the framing as a
"spirit replacement".

### A chemical aside: why are non-alcoholic spirits so different?

{% image '/assets/121/ethanol.webp', alt: 'An ethanol molecule', style: 'width: 400px' %}{% endimage %}

The experience of drinking a liquid has a lot of sensory components. There's the
texture and even temperature of the liquid, the "burning" sensation of a high
alcohol content, the flavor on your tongue, and the scents in your nose (which
themselves change over the course of a single sip). The temperature is pretty
easy to control. The alcohol burn is hard to replicate and debatable whether
it's even worthwhile[^1]. But the parts in between—flavor and texture—are more
complicated, and intimately tied to the actual chemistry at play.

[^1]: Even alcohol drinkers vary in how much they perceive this. Back when I was
  more regularly drinking cask-strength spirits, I wouldn't feel any burn from
  spirits at 50% or more ABV, while people who were used to cocktails would
  often find 40% ABV to be so hot on the tongue as to make it hard to even
  perceive flavor.

For better or for worse, ethanol (the chemical name for what we commonly call
"alcohol" in beverages) is particularly good at providing both flavor and
texture. It binds eagerly with molecules like esters, aldehydes, and ketones
that communicate flavor to our mouths and noses. Because it's much less polar
than water, it's also far better at binding to oils to create a more diverse
range of textures on the tongue.

Alcohol isn't the only chemical that can do this—fats, sugars, and acetic acid
(vinegar) are also good carriers of flavor, but they all carry their own flavor
and/or textures. Which isn't a bad thing! It's fun to play with the constraints
that exist and try to build something that works with them. Which is another
issue I have with non-alcoholic spirits as a category: rather than building on
the existing foundation, they seem to just want to apply "technology" to
reproduce something that doesn't even need to be reproduced.

### Case study: the "Sparkling Negroni" mocktail

{% image '/assets/121/sparkling-negroni.webp',
    style: 'width: 600px',
    alt: 'Sparkling Negroni canned mocktail' %}
  A peach-colored can labeled "Wild Folk Sparkling Negroni" with "Non-alcoholic
  cocktail" printed below.
{% endimage %}

This post was actually sparked not by a spirit but by a canned mocktail I
bought. I love bitter flavors (they're [making moves lately]), and as mentioned
I don't actually drink that much, so I'm always on the lookout for nice bitter
beverages[^2]. I also _love_ a good [Negroni], so this seemed like a perfect
opportunity. But I was tragically disappointed.

[making moves lately]: https://cohost.org/Willow/post/1509388-accidentally-wandere
[Negroni]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negroni

[^2]: The best I've found so far is San Pellegrino's Sanbittèr, but I try not to
  buy Nestlé products if I can avoid it because I don't like slavery, water
  theft, union busting, or really any of their numerous crimes and misdeeds.

It's not that the beverage itself was bad. Aside from the carbonation level
being undetectable, it's something I wouldn't be unhappy at all to serve a
guest. But it was absolutely _not_ a Negroni. The sweetness was light and fruity
rather than the rich deep roundness of vermouth, and although the bitterness was
there Campari's distinctive flavor was replaced by something much more similar
to the flavor of tea.

I wish I lived in a world where something like this could be simply and
accurately billed as a "Bittersweet Herbal Tea". I promise you don't need to be
a Negroni. A Negroni is already a Negroni! The world of beverages can be so much
richer when it's not constrained to simply mimicking its alcoholic subset and
instead sets off in exploration of flavors and textures work well in their own
right.
