---
title: First Thoughts on Civ VII
tags: [civilization, civilization vii]
---

I have more time recorded on _Civilization VI_ than any other game in my
library. It's been my go-to game to play with {% mention 'Liz' %} since it
launched. Before that, I played nearly endless amounts of _Civilization II_ and
_III_, and plenty of _IV_, _Alpha Centauri_, and _Beyond Earth_ as well. This is
probably the single series of games I have maintained the most interest in
across my whole life.

So, naturally, we pounced on the opportunity to pay some extra money up-front
for guaranteed access to the first two _Civ VII_ DLCs as well as a chance to
play the game a week ahead of its official launch. Of course, these games are
always a bit shaky at the beginning, before patches balance out uneven mechanics
and DLC adds depth to places that are shallow in the base game. We went into
this knowing that we'd need to keep our patience close at hand.

But patience alone wasn't enough to get us through the game as shipped. _Civ
VII_ is direly underbaked, missing critical user interface affordances at every
turn―most of which have been established standards for generations of
_Civilization_ games!—and in some cases being so opaque as to be nearly
unplayable. At the same time, it's incredibly ambitious, making major overhauls
to the formula that are aimed at addressing flaws that one might consider
inextricable from the 4X genre. The result is something that was bound to be
polarizing even if it worked.

## Dramatic Changes in _Civilization VII_

The moment-to-moment mechanics of _Civ VII_ look familiar to anyone familiar
with the franchise. You still have cities and units on a game board, which still
uses the hexagonal tiles introduced in _Civ V_. You can build buildings in your
cities, explore the map, work your way through parallel trees of technology and
civics, and pursue either diplomacy or war with other nations you encounter. But
the details of almost all these systems have been changed dramatically.

### Improvements Without Builders

One of the earliest things one notices upon starting a game of _Civ VII_ is that
there's no equivalent to the Builder or Worker unit from previous games.
Instead, tiles are improved as part of a city's growth. Each time a city gains a
population, it can improve one tile, also growing its borders to include the
adjacent tiles (if they aren't too far from the city center). Gone is the choice
between mining or farming a grassy hill; each terrain type has exactly one
improvement which is automatically applied. Later in the game, you can unlock
"unique improvements" which further enhance improved tiles, but these must be
built or purchased like buildings.

This immediately gestures at one of the game's core design goals: to mitigate
the micromanagement that blossoms as the game wears on. _Civ VI_ already took a
gentler stand on this, moving from immortal Workers to Builders that have
limited charges. But doing away with this unit type entirely means that the mid-
to late-game is no longer bogged down with the weight of choosing
actions[^automate-workers] for a small army of builders every turn to allow all
your cities to keep up with the latest improvements you've unlocked.

[^automate-workers]: Earlier games mitigated this micromanagement overload by
    allowing immortal workers to be automated, so that they'd choose their own
    improvements and gradually make your cities better without direct
    intervention. This obviously doesn't work nearly as well once you introduce
    _Civ VI_-style districts which put a lot of pressure on planning ahead for
    what a city will look like, but even worse than that it undermines the
    concept of the strategy game as a whole. If the best option for workers is
    to _not strategize_, then what value are they adding to the player's life?

I mention this first not just because it's one of the first noticeable changes
but because I wanted to lead with a really great design. Builders were
compelling in _Civ_ games not by their own merits, but because strategically
choosing how to use the available terrain makes the texture of the map extremely
relevant and gives each city a unique character. Tying improvements to growth
makes sense thematically, hits all the notes that you need mechanically, and
provides a huge micromanagement mitigation in one fell swoop.

That's not to say that it's perfect: there are serious issues with the execution
of the UI, as there are with every part of the game. It's difficult to tell what
benefits improving a given tile will have especially once you start to have
synergistic buildings, and it's nearly impossible to know anything about your
improvements when you're not actively growing a city. It's an almost
unimaginable oversight considering that the "city view" showing details and
population allocation has been standard since _Civ I_.

This points to a much more pernicious goal that appears to pervade this game:
simplifying the information presented to the player. It's true that there's a
lot of information in earlier _Civ_ games that can feel incomprehensible or even
overwhelming to a newer player. But having access to information is also
critical to the functioning of a strategy game. You can't meaningfully
strategize without understanding the consequences of your choices, and _Civ VII_
chooses to hide that information at nearly every turn.

### Districts and Buildings

Perhaps the biggest innovation in _Civ VI_ was the introduction of districts,
special buildings which were placed outside the city center and, once placed,
unlocked their own individual trees of buildings for the city. Districts added a
tremendous amount of depth to city planning largely because of the concept of
adjacency bonuses: a district's native yields depended on which other tiles it
abutted, including other districts, so optimizing a city involved carefully
planning where districts would go to mutually reinforce one another most
effectively.

_Civ VII_ brings this adjacency logic to the level of individual buildings.
*Everything* is now placed outside the city center[^city-center-building], with
two buildings allowed per hex and a requirement that "urban districts"—those
with buildings—be adjacent to one another. Most buildings now have adjacency
bonuses, and you can accrue additional benefits from placing buildings of the
same era on the same hex and even unlock unique bonuses from particular
combinations of buildings.

[^city-center-building]: With the exception of a single building slot available
    adjacent to the palace.

This is, on its face, _really cool_. Districts already added a ton of texture to
city-building, so doubling down on that concept and expanding it to reward other
types of geometry is very appealing. It hits what I've always considered to be a
crucial strength of the _Civilization_ franchise: its [lenticular
complexity][][^rosewater], the way it provides mechanical depth for players who
go looking for it without overwhelming players who are still learning the
basics. A novice player can just put buildings wherever and those buildings will
still function, while an advanced player can understand the system well enough
to plan their building placement many turns ahead and get rewarded for it. It's
one of the things that makes these games so fun to come back to over and over:
there's always a bit more you can do a bit more cleverly than before.

[lenticular complexity]: https://magic.wizards.com/en/news/making-magic/lenticular-design-2014-12-15

[^rosewater]: I used to be a huge reader of Mark Rosewater when I was younger.
    Since then, I've soured on a lot of his design philosophy, especially after
    seeing so many situations where he's done an about-face without really
    grappling with why his thought process was wrong in the past. But I think
    this concept in particular is extremely valuable across contexts for
    understanding how (and why) to make something that's appealing for a range
    of experiences, investment levels, and needs.

But lenticular design does exist to some degree in tension with the goals of
avoiding micromanaging and simplifying information. In order for a player to be
able to engage with the hidden complexity of the game, they need a way to see
and manipulate that complexity. When building a city, _Civ VII_ shows very
little information about _why_ a building has the adjacencies it does, or what
effect it will have on other buildings' adjacencies. It creates a very smart
system for hiding complexity and then makes it nearly impossible for those who
want it to find it.

### Cities, Towns, and the Settlement Limit

The first settlement in a game of _Civ VII_ is a pretty normal city by
_Civilization_ standards. The second is something substantially different. All
new settlements begin as towns, which means they have no production and can only
*purchase* buildings and units. Any production they would get from improvements
or buildings is instead converted to gold. Once they hit seven population, you
can choose to "specialize" them, giving some particular bonus and sending all
their excess food to adjacent cities instead of growing them further.

Towns _can_ eventually become cities for a substantial sum of gold, which
becomes smaller the higher the population is of the settlement in question.
Generally speaking, the game is balanced around the expectation that there will
be about one town for each city in order to provide sufficient growth and cash
flow for the empire.

There is also a limit on the overall number of settlements (towns _or_ cities)
you can maintain at once without incurring substantial unhappiness
penalties[^unhappiness]. This begins at four settlements in the first age,
although civics, technologies, and later eras increase the limit over time. It's
unclear to me whether the game balance as it stands actually makes it
undesirable in practice to go over this limit—certainly I saw Xerxes having
twelve cities in my game without succumbing to outright revolt—but the clear
message is that the design intent is for this limit to be fairly painful to
flout.

[^unhappiness]: Specifically, each settlement gets -5 happiness for each
    settlement you have over the limit. What specific effects low happiness has
    for a city beyond incrementally reduced yields are opaque because of the
    game's characteristic inability to explain anything at all.

Nothing contributes more to the late-game drag of _Civilization_ games than the
size of the empire, so the design logic tracks for trying to pull back on the
value of spreading out endlessly. In _Civ VI_ the winning strategy by a wide
margin was to create as many cities as possible, and a winning game could easily
be determined in the first fifty turns simply by being the first to settle a
crucial strategic location and use your loyalty pressure[^loyalty] to box out
your competitors from the best part of the continent. The settlement limit of
course exists to motivate a smaller empire, but towns have a similar effect in
essentially halving the number of cities that *actively and repeatedly* require
the player's attention. Without a build queue, they add much less management
complexity to the game than a full city.

[^loyalty]: Another thing that simply doesn't exist in this game. The only
    disincentive for settling right in the midst of another civ's territory is
    the diplomatic cost of pissing them off. If someone else settles near you,
    you can either go to war or accept it, which cuts off one of my favorite
    avenues for non-violent competition in older games.

Such a substantial limit on a civilization's size creates a serious risk,
though: at what point is the design undermining something that's critical to the
way players enjoy the game? While undoubtedly a fifty-city empire does involve a
tremendous amount of arbitrary and essentially-useless choices about what to
build, the second X in 4X is "expand" because _expanding is fun_. And part of
what makes the first X, "explore", fun as well is the idea that you'll be able
to engage with the territory you explore—something that's much less true if
expansion is so limited.

The town system works well for limiting the complexity of a large empire because
it reduces the number of decisions that have to be made _without_ reducing the
total occupied territory. I don't understand why, with such a powerful tool in
hand, the game also feels the need to impose a vastly more arbitrary numeric
limit on top. Let players stretch their legs—it's what they're here for!

### Diplomacy and Independent Nations

Diplomacy in _Civ VI_ was a bit of a hodge-podge. Some diplomatic actions with
other civilizations were just selected from a menu, while some were traded in an
exchange view that fundamentally reduced everything to a highly
exploitable[^usury] gold value. Engaging with city-states used an entirely
different system with a different currency, envoys. Engaging with world congress
in later ages used yet another system with yet another currency, diplomatic
favor.

_Civilization VII_ unifies all of these under a single currency: influence
points, which represent your diplomatic influence throughout the world. All menu
options with other civilizations and even independent nations (which replace
older _Civ_'s barbarians, and which eventually mature into city-states once a
civilization has engaged with them sufficiently) are now mediated by these
points. There is no more direct trade screen at all, with collaborative projects
(which of course cost influence) now the only way of sharing or transferring
resources between civilizations.

[^usury]: One of my favorite tactics when playing _Civilization VI_ against AIs
    was to become the world bank. Unless they disliked you, every civilization
    would be willing to sell you a thirty-turn annuity of one gold per turn in
    exchange for 21 gold up front, which for those keeping track at home is a
    42.9% return on investment. Doing this again and again while maintaining
    good relations would put the entire world deep in your debt, giving you
    functional control of the world GDP and making winning essentially trivial
    even on the hardest difficulties. The fact that the game was still fun with
    this laughably explotative mode of play is a testament both to the quality
    of the core concept _and_ the fact that optimizing strictly for balance
    isn't necessarily the right call for a 4X game.

This is a much cleaner system, and it makes accumulating influence feel valuable
and exciting in a way that none of the individual currencies did in _Civ VI_.
Engaging with independent nations and choosing to either wipe them out as
barbarians or help them blossom into city-states is charming, although all
city-states of a given type now allow a choice from a small pool of suzerain
bonuses which is a shame relative to the unique bonuses of _Civ VI_[^cards]. But
on the whole, this is a very positive change, adding a lot of depth to the
question of where and when you spend your influence and how much you prioritize
it relative to other resources.

[^cards]: Something that feels cool across many different games of many
    different genres is the idea of a "blank card": a class of game object that
    can have any mechanical effect that the designer can dream up (and, for
    video games, program). It's a well of essentially endless depth—actual card
    games have been plumbing it non-stop for decades—that can make a relatively
    simple set of base mechanics feel endlessly complex and novel. _Civ VII_
    still retains tons of blank cards (buildings, wonders, policies, leaders,
    and so on) but city-states represented a particular intersection of being
    randomly present on the map while also making it possible to work towards a
    known outcome that produced some very fun play patterns.

### Ages and the Great Reset

Now, finally, we get to the biggest of all the changes, the true defining
structure of _Civ VII_: the age system. Unlike in previous games, where the most
well-defined an "age" got was _Civ VI: Rise and Fall_'s concept of era score
leading to golden or dark ages, _Civ VII_ draws such a sharp line between each
age that it's fair to describe each one as being almost its own
game-within-a-game. Each age has its own tech and civics tree which does not
connect to that of the age before or after. Each age has a handful of unique
mechanics which aren't accessible before or after, and which feed into quests
called "legacy paths" which provide substantial bonuses for the next age. Each
age even sees you choose a new civilization, although your leader remains the
same.

And, crucially, each age resets the game board.

This isn't _entirely_ true. You keep all your existing settlements, although
only one remains a city and the rest revert to towns at the age transition. You
keep your improvements and buildings, although most buildings from previous ages
have dramatically reduced yields without reducing their upkeep cost at
all[^old-buildings]. You'll be granted a few new-era military units in exchange
for your old ones, although by no means on a one-for-one basis. But your trade
routes are severed, your wars are ended, your exploration is curtailed, and all
the research and culture you pursed becomes irrelevant.

[^old-buildings]: This is, in a sense, a solution to a problem posed by the new
    adjacency-focused building mechanic. A typical _Civ VI_ game would see
    late-game cities with building and district counts in the high teens or
    twenties—far more than could be placed two-per-tile while still maintaining
    a decent number of improvements. Making older buildings clearly outmoded and
    encouraging their demolition and replacement helps preserve space without
    having to limit the number of available buildings.

Judging by the feedback discord I've been reading, this is by far the most
controversial change in the game. At the same time, there are real benefits. The
distinct ages allow for substantially different mechanics across them, such as
the treasure fleets that define the exploration age. The hard resets do a lot to
reduce the amount of micromanaging one does as the scope of the game balloons
out of control. And, crucially, the separation limits how possible it is for a
player to snowball.

Realistically, in older _Civ_ games, if you placed a bet seventy turns in that
the leading player wins the game, you'd be right the substantial majority of the
time. Resources beget territory, territory begets resources, and it's hard for a
player who's winning today to lose tomorrow. And _Civilization_ games are
_long_. How many hours can you just go through the motions of completing a win
you already locked in before it's not enjoyable anymore? At what point is it
worth dramatically mitigating the overall effect of the first two ages 
exchange for giving the third[^ages] any relevance at all?

[^ages]: Yes, there are only three ages in _Civ VII_: Antiquity, Exploration,
    and Modern. The medieval era is the most conspicuously absent, but there are
    also no distinct classical or industrial eras. This has essentially no
    mechanical bearing, but it cuts deep at the hearts of long-time fans of a
    franchise whose core promise is playing out the _entire_ development of a
    civilization.

I honestly don't know the answer to these questions yet. Part of the problem, as
I mentioned in an earlier footnote, is that going through the motions is _fun_.
Rolling your snowball civilization downhill as it inevitably grows larger and
larger and crushes all other snowballs beneath it is an intrinsically joyous
experience, but it's also one that's bound up tightly with slog and sameyness.
I'm impressed that _Civ VII_ took such a big swing to disentangle those, and I'm
a bit heartbroken that it did so with a UI so inadequate that it will
undoubtedly cast a pall on the more ambitious and thoughtful aspects of the
design.

These questions can't realistically be answered without real experience, and
right now there's no way to have that experience without slamming into unrelated
unambiguous failings. I believe there is a way to pull back on the
micromanagement complexity and the late-game slog of the _Civilization_ formula
without throwing the baby out with the bathwater. I believe _most_ of the novel
designs in Civ VII are really smart steps in that direction. But as it stands, I
can't judge it holistically because it's barely playable at all.

## If I Ran the Zoo...

If I had to make the call right now, I'd keep most of the changes in _Civ VII_:
the builder-free improvements, the explicitly-placed buildings, the towns, and
the diplomacy points. I'd get rid of the settlement limit in exchange for
something gentler, like a penalty to net overall yields that limits but doesn't
erase the extra gains from each individual city. I'd reinstate unique suzerain
bonuses, correlating with each independent city-state's name, with a way to see
what the bonus will be before deciding to befriend them.

And, as I see it today, I would choose to do away with the strict age divisions.
It's possible that after a handful of patches, 2K will find a way to thread the
needle and make this system scratch the same itch as a campaign with full
continuity, but I just don't think that's likely. It's too tightly targeted at
dissipating the snowball effect, and the snowball is too much what I love about
these games. Which breaks my heart a bit, because game development
practicalities make it essentially impossible to remove this: it's too tightly
wound around the design of the civilizations, the age-specific mechanics, the
tech and civics trees, and on and on. _Civ VII_ without it would essentially
have to be _Civ VIII_.

Which I guess, now, is what I'm waiting for. Liz and I will go back to _VII_ for
sure and give it another honest try in a few months. Maybe we'll even play a
number of games through. But unless they manage a miracle, even once the UI
issues are fixed and the game is clearly what they envisioned it, it's hard to
imagine that being the sort of game I'd put another 900 hours into.
