---
title: "Power, Skill, and Silksong"
tags: [game design, hollow knight]
---

**While this blog post does contain specific mechanical spoilers about _Hollow
Knight: Silksong_, they're only at the very end, clearly marked, and hidden by
default. Most of the post is spoiler-free.**

Many games, video and otherwise, are structured in a way that presents the
player with both challenges tools they can use to address those challenges. In
video games specifically, much hay is made online of the challenges themselves:
everyone talks about Ornstein and Smough, Absolute Radiance, or Balteus. But to
the player in the moment, the shape of the tools they use determines as much or
more about their actual experience.

Tools aren't just in-game items. They're anything that aids the player or allows
them to engage with the game, from their character's stats to movement mechanics
to the very concept of "make your character not be where the attack is". In
sports, the players themselves are the most important tools. In chess, the
pieces are tools but so are rules castling and stalemates. It's an intentionally
broad term to discuss a broad set of game structures.

These tools are not only the ultimate determiner of how difficult the challenge
is[^sl1], a well-designed arsenal gives players the opportunity to sculpt their
experience, creating a mode of play that fits both the needs of the challenge at
hand and their own personal preference. Often players end up self-sorting into
two rough camps: those who choose one set of tools (a "build") and stick with it
for every challenge and so experience challenges that may be easy for others as
very difficult when the tools they've chosen don't line up well, and those who
see each challenge as an opportunity to puzzle out the exact optimal set of
tools and so take down the challenge as easily as possible. I myself fall into
either camp depending on the specific context[^camps].

[^sl1]: The phenomenon of the _Dark Souls_ Soul Level 1 run is a sort of inverse
    example of this. The player chooses to specifically *limit* their toolkit by
    never leveling up (character level itself being of course a tool) in order
    to dial in a harder difficulty on a game they've already played, and so
    experience it from a different perspective.

[^camps]: When I played _Shin Megami Tensei III: Nocturne_, I would look up each
    fight and meticulously plan out builds hours in advance, carefully breeding
    the exact right demons to meet every challenge I faced. On my first run
    through a Soulslike game, I instead tend to stick pretty assiduously to a
    single build. Interestingly, I'm playing _Silksong_ more like SMT than like
    *Dark Souls*: I have a main loadout I mostly use for traversal, but I'll
    switch that up to some degree for most boss fights.

One of the first thing a player will ask when choosing which tools to use is,
"what's the most powerful?" And in some cases the answer to this is
straightforward. In *Dark Souls*, the Straight Sword Hilt is certainly among the
weakest weapons you can use by any objective measure. But in many cases the
answer is unclear. There is no consensus "best" weapon in _Dark Souls_ nor its
successors, because what "power" even means depends on the player's play style,
their goals, and to a substantial degree, their skill.

## Defining Skill

I want to take a moment here to clarify what I mean by "skill", at least for the
purposes of this post. I don't really want to get into the weeds discussing
video game difficulty here and now, but I do think that discourse has made it
difficult to mention skill as a concept without raising everyone's hackles and
bringing in a bunch of extra baggage. So I'll try to be explicit about how I'm
using the term here.

I'm not talking about skill as in some sort of innate talent at video games or
even specifically hand-eye coordination or twitch reflexes. What I mean is
something that comes with practice and, especially, shedding the fear of the
unknown.

Every player, no matter how good or bad their reaction speed, is worse at the
game in the initial phase when they're still getting used to it. Everyone loses
some percent of their possible effectiveness from needing to manually think
through which actions to take, from not fully understanding the challenge
they're currently facing, and from not knowing how to match those actions up
with that challenge. I'd go so far as to say that for almost everyone, this lost
effectiveness is so large that it makes up the vast majority of the reason they
fail the challenges with which a given game presents them.

The other side of this coin, then, is that players can increase their
effectiveness simply by paying attention to their experiences and internalizing
them through practice. This scale of practice-driven effectiveness is what I
mean here by "skill". I certainly don't mean it as any measure of the player's
"quality" in a moral sense or whether they've "really" engaged with the game.
There's nothing *better* about spending the time practicing a game so you can
beat it blindfolded except inasmuch as that experience is intrinsically
rewarding to the player.

## Power and Skill in Dialog

What's the more powerful ring in *Dark Souls*, Tiny Being's Ring which increases
the player's max HP by 5% or Red Tearstone Ring which adds 50% attack power when
the player is below 20% HP?

It's tempting to say that the answer is Red Tearstone Ring hands down. It's a
staple of all the most challenging ways people play the game: Soul Level 1 runs,
hitless boss fights, and speed runs. Tiny Being's Ring on the other hand is
available as a starting item and is handily outclassed by numerous other rings
which the player could use in that slot.

I don't think this answer is _wrong_ at all, but I do think it's incomplete. For
an unskilled player, Red Terastone Ring might as well have no ability at all.
When the whole game is full of unknown monstrosities with unfamiliar moves, the
safest course of action is to *never* be below 20% HP if you can help it. Any
time you find yourself that low, your first priority should be finding a safe
spot to heal. Tiny Being's Ring may not have a dramatic effect, but if that
little HP bump saves you from one hit that would have killed you otherwise it's
at least doing *something*.

We can think of power as a way of talking about what's most effective at helping
a given player overcome challenges with the least amount of effort. From this
perspective, how powerful something is depends on the player who's using it.
This sort of "power" doesn't make sense as a metric in its own rightâ€”for a
low-skilled player, Tiny Being's Ring is stronger than Red Tearstone Ring. For
my friend who never uses spells in *Hollow Knight*, the underwhelming
Grubsong[^grubsong] charm is stronger than the excellent Shaman
Stone[^shaman-stone].

[^grubsong]: You gain soul (a meter used for healing) every time you get hit.
    The rate on it is appalling.

[^shaman-stone]: Increases both the size and damage of all spells. I got a *lot*
    of mileage out of this bad boy in my playthrough.

But this is a little unsatisfying, because games are fundamentally social even
when they're single-player and tightly individualizing the concept of "power"
cuts off any ability to discuss it with others. What I think most people mean in
practice when they talk about it is something more like power pegged to some
sort of implicit "average player", although where this player falls specifically
in terms of skill and preferences is left unspecified, sometimes to the result
of confounding the whole conversation. If this average player is pretty good at
*Dark Souls*, maybe Red Tearstone Ring is better for them because they might be
able to survive long enough to get in some hits at 20% HP, but it's still much
weaker than one of the better options like Ring of Favor and Protection[^rofp].
I think if you posited this to a player, they wouldn't argue.

[^rofp]: Increases max HP, stamina, and equip load by 20%. Incredibly strong,
    but notionally "balanced" by the fact that it breaks forever if you take it
    off. Here's by *Dark Souls* hot tip of the day: don't take off Ring of Favor
    and Protection.

The power of tools affects skill as well. I talked about a tool's power as its
effectiveness in helping a given player overcome challenges *with the least
amount of effort*. In turn, exerting effort to overcome challenges is how the
player builds skill. So we can see tools as lowering the skill bar for facing a
given challenge, and we can see their power as how much they lower it[^skill].

[^skill]: Again, I want to be clear: I don't think this means that players who
    use all the tools available to them are "worse" in any sense at all. Finding
    ways to lower the skill bar *is the game* just as much as building skill to
    meet that bar. A player choosing where in the interaction of power and skill
    is most satisfying for them *is player customization* just as much as
    choosing a Greatsword because it makes them look like [Guts].

[Guts]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guts_(Berserk)

## Another Perspective on Power

I want to look at this from a slightly different angle, though, inspired by my
recent experience playing through *Silksong* and discussing the merits of
various builds with my friends. I want to look at which tools are best *the
first time through a game*. In other words, I want to view a tool's power as the
lowest overall skill required to overcome a challenge with that tool across all
starting skill levels. Red Tearstone Ring rates poorly on this metric because it
only becomes strong in the hands of players whose skill levels are already high,
but Tiny Being's Ring rates poorly as well because it doesn't lower the skill
requirement much for anyone.

This is particularly interesting in the context of _Silksong_ because it's full
of tools that are at their best when the player is already skilled. *Hollow
Knight*'s spell mechanic is the same way: you accumulate "soul" by hitting
enemies, and you can spend it either to heal or cast spells. While spells can do
a lot of damage, using them concretely eats into your ability to survive fights.

So, are spells powerful in _Hollow Knight_? By this metric, which I'll call
"initial power", I think they're good but not amazing. Their damage output is
big enough that learning to use them effectively can shorten some fights enough
to make up for lost heals, but not so strong that you can rely on only using
them and never healing without investing a _lot_ more time into building skill.

By contrast, we can also talk about "final power": the power of a tool once the
player has built up their skill and understands the game's challenges. (We can
frame this as the tool with the biggest overall reduction in skill required to
overcome a challenge with that tool across all skill levels.) *Hollow Knight*'s
spells rate very high here, because once you're getting hit infrequently enough
they can massively accelerate fights and reduce the overall risk.

## The Part Where I Talk About _Silksong_

I'm not going to spoil anything you can't find in Act 1, but I will talk frankly
about certain mechanics.

<details>
<summary><strong>Reveal spoilers</strong></summary>

There are so many _Silksong_ mechanics whose power scales up with the player's
skill: skills work just like _Hollow Knight_'s spells, of course, but tools are
also easier to stomach incorporating into your routine if you're confident
you'll win a fight before having to go farm more of the crafting materials
needed to create them. Some crests place restrictions on healing which are
mitigated by better positioning skill (as well as of course taking less damage).
The upgraded Hunter crest directly scales its damage with how infrequently you
get hit. At the far end, Barbed Bracelet can double your damage at the cost of
doubling all damage you receive in what amounts to this game's own Red Tearstone
Ring.

But this line of thinking was most proximately inspired by thinking about the
Reaper crest. If you're not familiar, this crest gives Hornet a moveset with
very long-range swings including a pretty straightforward downward aerial attack
(which is incredibly important in these games for both platforming and dealing
with enemies) in exchange for being quite slow.

I heard someone (tentatively) call Reaper a "noob trap", but I don't think
that's right. I think rather that it has a high ratio of initial power to final
power. Reaper's long range isn't just comfortable (although it is also that),
it's forgiving. It allows players to be messy in their positioning and
inaccurate in their guesses about what enemies will do next with much more
generosity than other crests. And when you're fighting new enemies or traversing
a new platforming challenge, that's extremely valuable. On the other side of the
same coin, the cost of pushing less damage is relatively lower early on because
it's not always obvious when it's safe to land multiple attacks anyway.

Reaper (along with tools like Warding Bell that similarly forgive sloppiness)
are perfectly suited to playing in an exploratory style, learning the rhythms of
enemies and fights that you're seeing for the first time. They provide initial
power which lets players build the familiarity they need to take full advantage
of other tools that are better at higher skill levels. It's not so much a "noob
trap" as a "noob aid". More importantly, the concept of "initial power" and
"final power" help us understand _why_ that is.
  
</details>
